Revised 14C chronologies confirm evolutionary stasis during rapid climate shifts at Rancho La Brea

The tar pits at Rancho La Brea preserve an unparalleled variety and abundance of late Pleistocene vertebrate skeletal remains, effectively taking repeated samples from a diverse single ecological community from 37ka to 9ka. This interval spans the rise and fall of the last glacial maximum, and regional temperature is also reasonably well constrained by pollen and oxygen isotope data. As a result, the Rancho La Brea vertebrate fossil collection presents an opportunity to investigate shifts of mean body size and shape in a whole array of populations as the climate cooled into the last glacial maximum and then warmed again into the Holocene. Since 2010, we have collected morphometric data sets for 28 of the most common vertebrate species at Rancho La Brea, mostly measurements on long bones. We grouped each data set by pit and conducted pairwise, ANOVA, and time-series analyses in a series of papers which attempted to address the hypothesis that Pleistocene glacial-interglacial cycles applied evolutionary pressure to body size as predicted by Bergmann's rule. The ANOVA and pairwise comparisons consistently found minimal changes in population body size mean over the late Pleistocene across all species, flouting the general observation that many of these species are subject to Bergmann's rule in modern populations. The glacial-interglacial cycle appears to be too fast to produce an evolutionary response in population mean size in any species, even small nonmigratory birds with limited ranges.
However, the treatment of age in these studies was simplistic and unsatisfactory, based only on estimated mean age for each pit. This model does not account for the unique taphonomy at RLB, where each pit becomes active, absorbs remains for some amount of time, and then closes, producing a series of well-constrained but completely time-averaged fossil deposits. In this study, as part of an ongoing revision of chronologies for other Late Quaternary North American vertebrate sites, a revised chronology has been computed for each of the pits, producing new maximum and minimum age estimates based on all the known high-quality radiocarbon ages for each pit. We redid the time-series analyses of body size and shape change on the basis of these new dates, using a uniform probability model for the age of specimens within each pit, and additionally compared our measurements directly with several temperature variables. This allows us to more accurately reassess the sequential shifts in body size and shape in each population over time and their association with climate. Our new statistical methods validate our previous conclusions and provide a more sound basis for our inferences about the effect of short-term climate fluctuations on body size.